Look, I used to eat raw cactus pads...
cue-3
you just removed the spines.
cue-4
If you wanted, you wanted some over there...
back in the time when I
cue-5
lived,
cue-6
you’d kill little birds to eat. Well,
you’d barbecue them or
cue-7
stew them with chili or with whatever you
wanted, if you had it, and if
cue-8
not, you’d just lick your fingers, seeing how tasty
it was. The grasshoppers,
cue-9
the mourning dove, which one is the dove? The
grasshoppers, man. A mourning dove...
cue-10
back then we used to say in my town,
I'm from Jilotepec...
cue-11
from here to Jilotepec.
cue-12
Eh, here look at me. All this is the State
of... the State of
cue-13
Mexico,
cue-14
the state of Toluca,
cue-15
I'm from Jilotepec whenever you want to go.
cue-16
I used to eat nixtamal, raw corn, uh,
cue-17
no tortillas, nothing like bam, bam,
bam.
cue-18
And I would go up the hill
cue-19
when I could, you could bring back firewood and
if not, well you brought nothing. But there,
cue-20
the hardships, the hardships, my friend, well
you guys don't know anymore, here there is
cue-21
nothing.
cue-22
There is nothing.
cue-23
But yes,
cue-24
I remind you, I suffered a hell of a lot. I am
eighty-six years old,
cue-25
my friend,
cue-26
or my friends, whoever it is. Two or three or
four, I don't know,
cue-27
but now if you see me standing, they'd
say: "What about this guy?"
cue-28
No, this bastard
cue-29
is,
cue-30
is and will be, God willing. That much is true, if God
wills it,
cue-31
I... If God wills it, I will be as you
are. And if
cue-32
not, well anyway, my respect to
you all.
cue-33
And you know what? Alfalfa, the
greens (quelites), the... what's it called? The
cue-34
mallow... we ate all those, and so what,
cue-35
here you don't eat a damn thing man,
cue-36
very... all
cue-37
that stuff I ate. Amaranth greens, the, the
raw cactus, the
cue-38
raw corn, the, uh, the nixtamal, everything.
cue-39
I didn't know a damn thing, man. What-- what is the
cue-40
problem, it's just that I'm telling it,
my whole story. And here you have me now,
cue-41
standing,
cue-42
sitting, dancing. That suits me! That does.
cue-43
[hums a song]
cue-44
But if you mess with a girl, it's bad news.
cue-46
If you mess with a girl, it's bad news,
cue-47
it has to be.
cue-48
And none of that
cue-49
grabbing the... Well, in that time, none
of grabbing the neck, none of grabbing
cue-50
the... You know, like, uh, like they say,
grabbing the waist and everything, and here.
cue-51
No, in that time no. You touched her waist
just a little and she would scream
cue-52
out loud. And there were
cue-53
girls, girls, I'm talking about girls
of thirty-five, of, of, of
cue-54
thirty years old, of twenty-eight years old,
little ones, man. There, nothing, in my
cue-55
town, it's called Jilotepec.
cue-56
It is joined with what is here, the state of
Toluca.
cue-57
And whenever you want to meet me, I'll be
present.
cue-58
I don't hide. That, uh,
cue-59
poor boys,
cue-60
well, or girls, maybe they are twenty-something
years old, but if they haven't lived life like
cue-61
me... I worked, I cried, I shouted,
cue-62
I did it all. What? And here I am. And here I am.
cue-63
And I drank 96 proof alcohol, I threw myself in,
like they say "do you throw yourself in the hole?",
cue-64
well let's go, man, but you don't die.
And I bought a canteen
cue-65
to see if I could finish it. I had beer,
I had
cue-66
96 proof alcohol.
cue-67
I had Charanda... Well, I finished it,
man.
cue-68
And here I still am, thanks to God. And I
feel really at ease, because-- but
cue-69
not just because of my own badassery. First
my God and then, afterwards, you
cue-70
bastards. You guys. And how many years will you
live, Boni, whatever you-- would like
cue-71
to live? God gives me license. No, well I
think I won't reach
cue-72
ninety.
cue-73
I won't make it. Why? You know why?
Why, Boni? Because...
cue-74
Well sometimes I have problems at home,
even though, even though I am
cue-75
the... Yes, the designated one there, but there are
problems, yes, sometimes. A damn
cue-76
little anger or something, something, or X things. Then,
drinking my pulque,
cue-77
that...
cue-78
do you think this man, this friend,
cue-79
this gentleman,
cue-80
is...
cue-81
is or will be?
cue-82
Or is he?
cue-83
Do you think that with eighty-six years
cue-84
completed...? And I have, well, I am going to
complete on the
cue-85
14th of May, I complete my eighty-seven
years.
cue-86
And come on bastards here you have me.
cue-87
And up with the North,
cue-88
which is also a town, and
cue-89
up with Cartagena. And cheers, Boni.
cue-90
And up with Pablito,
cue-91
and also Toluca.
cue-92
Why not?
cue-93
It's the state, uh, Paraje, what. I live there
in El Paraje, friends. Whenever
cue-94
you want to visit me, well there it is.
cue-95
I have a little business there.
cue-96
And we'll have some beers, well, you drink them,
because I don't drink that shit. There
cue-97
they forbid me and... Just your pulque, right?,
also. Just pulque. I come from here, fucking
cue-98
great. With Pablito sometimes I am fucking
great. I am with him. I mean, I have more
cue-99
friendships and I want to be your friends
if you want. And if not, well like the
cue-100
saying goes, everyone to their own house. I'm leaving
[chuckle].
cue-101
See you Boni.
cue-102
How tasty the Neutle is. I bet you're gonna say:
what is that?
cue-103
It's pulque.
cue-104
Neutle
cue-105
means that it is pulque
cue-106
because back in my Town,
cue-107
well I used to speak in Otomi
cue-108
who knows, I don't even remember anymore. Better
leave it there.